Adding a Module
***************

When using MicroPython, you have even bigger chance to need your own library
written in C than in other Python implementations. You might want to use one of
the existing libraries for your platform, get access to some peripherals or
other features of the hardware that is not exposed to Python by default, or
even just do something faster and with smaller memory overhead. To do that, you
will need to extend the existing firmware with your own C code, and this
article is going to show you how to do it, using the ESP8266 port as the
example.

Note: you can use any naming-scheme you like and do not have to name your 
variables or data-type in any specific way. If you plan on extending a 
Micropython port and create pull requests, you should however use the same 
naming scheme of micropython. See the ESP8266 port for examples.

Adding Your Own Source File
===========================

In order to add your own MicroPython module written in C, you need to create a
new C file and add references to it to several files, so that the file is
picked up during the compilation.

First of all, you need to add it to the ``Makefile``, to the list of source
files in the ``SRC_C`` variable. Make sure to follow the same format as the
other files in there. The order doesn't matter much.

.. code-block:: make

    SRC_C = \
            main.c \
            system_stm32.c \
            stm32_it.c \
            ...
            mymodule.c
            ...

The second file you will need to add to is ``esp8266.ld``, which is the map of
memory used by the compiler. You have to add it to the list of files to be put
in the ``.irom0.text`` section, so that your code goes into the instruction
read-only memory (iROM). If you fail to do that, the compiler will try to put
it in the instruction random-access memory (iRAM), which is a very scarce
resource, and which can get overflown if you try to put too much there.

Now just create an empty ``mymodule.c`` file, and run the compilation to see
that it is now included in the firmware.


Creating a Python Module
========================

We have our file, but it doesn't actually do anything. It's empty, and there
is no new python module that we could import. Time to change that.

From the C side, modules in MicroPython are simply structs with a certain
structure. Open the ``mymodule.c`` file and put this code inside:


.. code-block:: c

    #include "py/nlr.h"
    #include "py/obj.h"
    #include "py/runtime.h"
    #include "py/binary.h"
    #include "portmodules.h"

    STATIC const mp_map_elem_t mymodule_globals_table[] = {
        { MP_OBJ_NEW_QSTR(MP_QSTR___name__), MP_OBJ_NEW_QSTR(MP_QSTR_mymodule) },
    };

    STATIC MP_DEFINE_CONST_DICT ( 
        mp_module_mymodule_globals, 
        mymodule_globals_table
    );

    const mp_obj_module_t mp_module_mymodule = {
        .base = { &mp_type_module },
        .globals = (mp_obj_dict_t*)&mp_module_mymodule_globals,
    };

What does this code do? It just defines a python module, using
``mp_obj_module_t`` type, and then initializes some of its fields, such as the
base type, the name, and the dictionary of globals for that module. In that
dictionary, it defines one variable, ``__name__``, with the name of our module
in it. That's it.

Now, for this module to actually be available for import, we need to add it to
``mpconfigport.h`` file to ``MICROPY_PORT_BUILTIN_MODULES``:

.. code-block:: c

    extern const struct _mp_obj_module_t mp_module_mymodule;

    #define MICROPY_PORT_BUILTIN_MODULES \
        { MP_OBJ_NEW_QSTR(MP_QSTR_umachine), (mp_obj_t)&machine_module }, \
        ...
        { MP_OBJ_NEW_QSTR(MP_QSTR_mymodule), (mp_obj_t)&mp_module_mymodule }, \

Now you can try compiling the firmware and flashing it to your board. Then you
can run ``import mymodule`` and see it imported.


Adding a Function
=================

Now let's add a simple function to that module. Edit ``mymodule.c`` again and
add this code right after the includes:

.. code-block:: c

    #include <stdio.h>

    STATIC mp_obj_t mymodule_hello(void) {
        printf("Hello world!\n");
        return mp_const_none;
    }
    STATIC MP_DEFINE_CONST_FUN_OBJ_0(mymodule_hello_obj, mymodule_hello);


This creates a function object ``mymodule_hello_obj`` which takes no arguments,
and when called, executes the C function ``mymodule_hello``. Also note, that
our function has to return something (as every Python function returns an 
mp_obj_t-struct) -- so we return ``None``. Now we need to
actually add that function object to our module:

.. code-block:: c

    STATIC const mp_map_elem_t mymodule_globals_table[] = {
        { MP_OBJ_NEW_QSTR(MP_QSTR___name__), MP_OBJ_NEW_QSTR(MP_QSTR_mymodule) },
        { MP_OBJ_NEW_QSTR(MP_QSTR_hello), (mp_obj_t)&mymodule_hello_obj },
    };

Micropython uses the QSTR-macros to define constant strings. This is used to 
identify strings and store only unique ones for preserving memory (as it is 
very limited on the PyBoard-Hardware). Your port has a file ``qstrdefsport.h``. 
In our case add ``Q(hello)`` to the list (on a new line). This will define the 
string ``hello`` for Micropython. Failing to do so will result in a missing 
file on compilation. 

Now when you compile and flash the firmware, you will be able to import the
module and call the function inside it.

Function Arguments
==================

The ``MP_DEFINE_CONST_FUN_OBJ_0`` macro that we used to define our function is
a shortcut for defining a function with no arguments. We can also define a
function that takes a single argument with ``MP_DEFINE_CONST_FUN_OBJ_1`` -- the
C function then needs to take an argument of type ``mp_obj_t``:

.. code-block:: c

    STATIC mp_obj_t mymodule_hello(mp_obj_t what) {
        printf("Hello %s!\n", mp_obj_str_get_str(what));
        return mp_const_none;
    }
    STATIC MP_DEFINE_CONST_FUN_OBJ_1(mymodule_hello_obj, mymodule_hello);

This function will use the C-function ``printf`` to output a string. The 
parameter ``what`` will be turned into a string by the 
``mp_obj_str_get_str``-function (i.e. by Micropython). 

Note that the ``mp_obj_str_get_str`` function will automatically raise the
right exception on the python side if the argument we gave it is not a python
string.  This is very convenient.

It's also possible to define functions with variable number of arguments, or
even with keyword arguments -- you can easily find examples of that in the
modules already included in MicroPython. I will not be covering this in detail.


Classes
=======

A class is a C-struct with certain fields, quite similar to a module:

.. code-block:: c

    // creating the table of global members
    STATIC const mp_rom_map_elem_t mymodule_hello_locals_dict_table[] = { };
    STATIC MP_DEFINE_CONST_DICT(mymodule_hello_locals_dict, 
                                mymodule_hello_locals_dict_table);

    // create the class-object itself
    const mp_obj_type_t mymodule_helloObj_type = {
        // "inherit" the type "type"
        { &mp_type_type },
         // give it a name
        .name = MP_QSTR_helloObj,
         // give it a print-function
        .print = mymodule_hello_print,
         // give it a constructor
        .make_new = mymodule_hello_make_new,
         // and the global members
        .locals_dict = (mp_obj_dict_t*)&mymodule_hello_locals_dict,
    };

It needs two functions: one for creating the class and allocating all the
memory it needs, and one for printing the objects of that class (similar to
python's ``__repr__``). Let's add them near the top of our file:

.. code-block:: c
    
    // this is the actual C-structure for our new object
    typedef struct _mymodule_hello_obj_t {
        // base represents some basic information, like type
        mp_obj_base_t base;
        // a member created by us
        uint8_t hello_number;
    } mymodule_hello_obj_t;


We define a C-struct, which holds the class data and one additional field 
``hello_number``. Next we need a function to print the object and a constructor:

.. code-block:: c

    mp_obj_t mymodule_hello_make_new( const mp_obj_type_t *type, 
                                      size_t n_args, 
                                      size_t n_kw, 
                                      const mp_obj_t *args ) {
        // this checks the number of arguments (min 1, max 1);
        // on error -> raise python exception
        mp_arg_check_num(n_args, n_kw, 1, 1, true); 
        // create a new object of our C-struct type
        mymodule_hello_obj_t *self = m_new_obj(mymodule_hello_obj_t);
        // give it a type
        self->base.type = &mymodule_helloObj_type;
        // set the member number with the first argument of the constructor
        self->hello_number = mp_obj_get_int(args[0]);
        return MP_OBJ_FROM_PTR(self);
    }


    STATIC void mymodule_hello_print( const mp_print_t *print, 
                                      mp_obj_t self_in, 
                                      mp_print_kind_t kind ) {
        // get a ptr to the C-struct of the object
        mymodule_hello_obj_t *self = MP_OBJ_TO_PTR(self_in);
        // print the number
        printf ("Hello(%u)", self->hello_number);
    }

Now we need to add our object to the module, by adding it into the global 
member dictionary of our module:

.. code-block:: c

    STATIC const mp_map_elem_t mymodule_globals_table[] = {
        { MP_OBJ_NEW_QSTR(MP_QSTR___name__), MP_OBJ_NEW_QSTR(MP_QSTR_mymodule) },
        { MP_OBJ_NEW_QSTR(MP_QSTR_hello), (mp_obj_t)&mymodule_hello_obj },
        { MP_OBJ_NEW_QSTR(MP_QSTR_helloObj), (mp_obj_t)&mymodule_helloObj_type },
    };

Note that both the function ``mymodule_hello_obj`` added earlier to our module 
and the class ``mymodule_hello_obj`` are passed as ``mp_obj_t`` to the 
globals table of the module. 

Adding Methods
==============

Methods in MicroPython are just functions in the class's locals dict. You add
them the same way as you do to modules, just remember that the first argument
is a pointer to the data struct:

.. code-block:: c

    STATIC mp_obj_t mymodule_hello_increment(mp_obj_t self_in) {
        mymodule_hello_obj_t *self = MP_OBJ_TO_PTR(self_in);
        self->hello_number += 1;
        return mp_const_none;
    }
    MP_DEFINE_CONST_FUN_OBJ_1(mymodule_hello_increment_obj, 
                              mymodule_hello_increment);


Also, don't forget to add them to the locals dict:

.. code-block:: c

    STATIC const mp_rom_map_elem_t mymodule_hello_locals_dict_table[] = {
        { MP_ROM_QSTR(MP_QSTR_inc), MP_ROM_PTR(&mymodule_hello_increment_obj) },
    }

Using our module in Micropython
===============================

Now we can use the module in Micropython after rebuilding our port. For example 
you can write a Python snippet like this:

.. code-block:: python

    import mymodule;
  
    mymodule.hello ();
    a = mymodule.hellObj ( 12 );
    print (mymodule);
    mymodule.inc();
    print (mymodule);
    
